boom an explosion of supersonic waves
interplanetary heat dust fumes the
earth's atmosphere has been invaded by a
cosmic rock the size of everest
a few seconds ago this rock weighing
trillions of tons was hurtling towards
earth
it could fly from new york to anchorage
faster than you could fry yourself an
omelet
this monster's name the cheek shiloh
incident
epic name right 66 million years ago
it crashed into the earth back then
dinosaurs ruled the planet
but not for long the epic collision took
place in modern mexico
in the yucatan peninsula right near
cancun
where the dinosaurs were vacationing
well probably not
still the huge space rock hit the ocean
but even all that water couldn't stop
the inevitable
the collision caused a huge amount of
energy to be released
the horror on a planetary scale had
begun
imagine a mini sun lighting up the
surface of the earth
with tsunamis the height of the statue
of liberty bursting from the epicenter
of the watery impact
not good the blast blew through the
surface of the earth
it was as hot as an oven and burnt
everything in its path
the impact provoked a colossal
earthquake and serious volcanic activity
a bunch of volcanoes simultaneously
released hot lava
and ash into the prehistoric skies
millions of tons of ash and suit
poisoned the air
this formed a huge ash cloud in the
atmosphere which blocked out the sun's
rays for several years
the long winter had begun only there
wasn't any snow
falling from the sky but rain made of
sulfuric acid
yes the cheek shalom incident might just
be the most important thing
that ever happened in the history of our
planet even more than youtube
back then there were loads of volcanic
eruptions a lot of flammable oxygen in
the atmosphere
constant temperature changes it was the
perfect and worst time for all of this
to go down
so how are we so sure about all this
well the asteroid left an absolutely
huge crater on the planet's surface
today this scar is hidden under the gulf
of mexico
scientists found a lot of places on
earth with abnormally high levels of
irradium this metal is very rare on
earth
but it's in a lot of asteroids that
scientists have examined
scientists studied some 66 million year
old rocks
in the layers of rock they found dust
the same dust that comes from asteroids
this could only have happened if a huge
asteroid had crashed into earth
the catastrophe led to the extinction of
not only the dinosaurs
but also the asteroid it was so hot at
the point of impact
part of the asteroid just disappeared
a lot of water vapor and carbon dioxide
shot up into the atmosphere
but the biggest problem sulfur it got
kicked up by the asteroid impact
and flew up into the air these tiny
sulfur particles blocked out a lot of
the sun's rays
without the sun a lot of plants
disappeared
and the climate eventually got colder
the immense heat
turned stones into glass scientists call
these things tectites
the energy of the impact threw them up
into the skies
after a short flight the tektites fell
down to earth
but it wasn't pretty rain fell too
only instead of drops of water you'd
have seen hot glassy fireballs
they bombarded the planet's surface for
days
the tektites set fire to everything
scientists found evidence of this
all over the world not just near the
collision side
but a lot of things from back then are
still a mystery
some scientists think that cheek chalub
wasn't even an asteroid
it might have been a comet asteroids are
mostly made of stone and metal
most often they kind of look like a
potato a comet contains rock metal and
ice comets look like dirty cosmic
snowflakes
complete with ammonia methane and carbon
dioxide
comets sometimes come from the oort
cloud it's a huge cloud of ice and
debris around our solar system
from time to time comets break free from
the back
and head towards our sun according to
scientists
this special comet flew right past
jupiter the gravity of that huge
planet accelerated the comet even more
it flew towards the sun
gaining more and more speed the comet's
outer eye
shield started to evaporate and it
probably gave off a lot of dust and gas
which made it look like it had a tail
the sun's gravity eventually
shattered the comet apart one of the
fragments flew through space
and crashed into the earth 66 million
years ago
so asteroid or comet the truth is
we'll never know what we do know is that
the earth was seriously
unlucky to be in its path and it was
never the same again
the catastrophe stopped the development
of 75 percent of life on earth
some bigger marine animals like
crocodiles turtles and fish
survive the impact out of all land
animals
the only ones to survive were the ones
that were on average
smaller than the modern raccoon that
includes a bunch of special species of
dinosaurs
the ancient ancestors of birds
scientists believe they survived for two
reasons
after the huge impact it took a long
time for plants to start growing again
and a lot of animals didn't survive most
remaining animals didn't have enough
food
but these dinosaurs had a beak with its
help
they could split open nuts and dig seeds
out of the soil
so they survived the second reason is
that these lucky guys had bigger brains
some people think that they were able to
cooperate with each other
and quickly adapt to the new conditions
other life forms survive too fungi and
mold survived underground and underwater
gradually the darkness cleared away and
ferns began to take over the lifeless
landscape
after a few thousand years forest
started to reappear
the animals that survived were pretty
much all inconspicuous and small
creatures
they lived in burrows safe from all that
hot ash
before the collision mammals had lived
in the shadow of dinosaurs
but with all the dinosaurs suddenly gone
things were about to change
mammals were able to take over they
began to dominate life
at least on land back to the moment when
everything
changed turns out it wasn't the size of
the asteroid that made it so powerful
it was more about the angle in which it
hit the earth
if the angle of impact had been
different the dinosaurs might have even
survived the catastrophe
so what would that have looked like well
let's travel back
way back oh no there's a giant asteroid
heading for earth
oh wait never mind it missed
there are plenty of earthquakes tsunamis
and volcanic eruptions every day but
dinosaurs don't mind that much no big
deal
fast forward a few million years and
most of these ancient lizards have
changed and are now
unrecognizable thanks to a couple of ice
ages
many dinosaurs are now totally covered
with feathers to protect them from the
cold
mammals exist but they're few and far
between
you see a lot of bats and caves there
are tons of rat sized rodents in the
forests
during the day they hide in the
undergrowth or in burrows
at night they go out in search of food
there are no horses no elephants or
other large mammals
why become large and eatable when there
are so many dangerous reptiles with huge
fangs around there are no whales in the
sea
parrots hawks and pigeons are nowhere to
be seen
but pterodactyls 2.0 whiz past you
constantly
some are about the size of a helicopter
while others are no larger than
a swan there are plenty of primates but
they're in no hurry to climb down from
their trees and walk on two legs
no venturing out into the savanna no
evolution into homo sapiens
in this alternate reality open spaces
are very dangerous
but then again so are forests and trees
nowhere
is safe to get some delicious primate
treats
many smaller dinosaurs learned to climb
trees
this was already happening back in the
cretaceous period
right before that huge asteroid just
missed earth
that would have been an epic collision
dinosaurs have grown wiser since that
near miss
some are even as smart as a modern
chicken
a large brain uses a lot of energy and
that's not always a good strategy for
survival
safer to keep brains small and keep
making those teeth
bigger and pointier